added article about goose into docs (#811)
ydb-platform/ydb: ydb/docs/en/core/integrations/goose.md

# Versioning data schema and migration in YDB using "goose"

## Introduction

> Goose is an open-source tool that helps version the data schema in the database and manage migrations. Goose supports many different databases, including YDB. Goose uses migration files and stores the state of migrations directly in the database in a special table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Goose](https://github.com/pressly/goose) is an open-source tool that helps to version the data schema in the database and manage migrations between these versions. Goose supports many different database management systems, including YDB. Goose uses migration files and stores the state of migrations directly in the database in a special table.
```

> ## Installation goose

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Install goose
```

> Goose installation options are described in [documentation](https://github.com/pressly/goose/blob/master/README.md#install).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Goose installation options are described in [its documentation](https://github.com/pressly/goose/blob/master/README.md#install).
```

## Launch arguments goose

> The `goose` utility is called with the command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After installation, the `goose` command line utility can be called:
```

```
$ goose <DB> <DSN> <COMMAND> <COMMAND_ARGUMENTS>
```

Where:

> - `<DB>` - database engine, in the case of YDB you should write `goose ydb`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `<DB>` - database engine, for YDB you should write `goose ydb`
```

- `<DSN>` - database connection string.
- `<COMMAND>` - the command to be executed. A complete list of commands is available in the built-in help (`goose help`).
- `<COMMAND_ARGUMENTS>` - command arguments.

## YDB connection string

> To connect to YDB you should use a connection string like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To connect to YDB you should use a connection string like:
```

```
<protocol>://<host>:<port>/<database_path>?go_query_mode=scripting&go_fake_tx=scripting&go_query_bind=declare,numeric
```

Where:

> - `<protocol>` - connection protocol (`grpc` for an unsecured connection or `grpcs` for a secure (`TLS`) connection). The secure connection (with `TLS`) requires certificates. You should declare certificates like this: `export YDB_SSL_ROOT_CERTIFICATES_FILE=/path/to/ydb/certs/CA.pem`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `<protocol>` - connection protocol (`grpc` for an unsecured connection or `grpcs` for a secure [TLS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transport_Layer_Security) connection). The secure connection requires certificates. You should declare certificates like this: `export YDB_SSL_ROOT_CERTIFICATES_FILE=/path/to/ydb/certs/CA.pem`.
```

> - `<protocol>` - connection protocol (`grpc` for an unsecured connection or `grpcs` for a secure (`TLS`) connection). The secure connection (with `TLS`) requires certificates. You should declare certificates like this: `export YDB_SSL_ROOT_CERTIFICATES_FILE=/path/to/ydb/certs/CA.pem`.

Reviewer: needs a link to documentation on how to obtain these certificates

Author: It is not simple for describe way for obtain certificates, but it is noisy for article
For example: Yandex Cloud CA.pem have one path, docker local ydb have another path (mount ydb_certs), bare-metal on-premice installation have third path (which devops maked handle using certbot or another CA)

> - `<host>` - connection address of YDB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `<host>` - hostname for connecting to YDB cluster.
```

> - `<port>` - port for connecting to YDB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `<port>` - port for connecting to YDB cluster.
```

- `<database_path>` - database in the YDB cluster.

> - `go_query_mode=scripting` - special `scripting` mode for executing queries by default in the YDB driver. In this mode, all requests from goose are sent to the YDB `scripting` service, which allows processing of both `DDL` and `DML` `SQL` statements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `go_query_mode=scripting` - special `scripting` mode for executing queries by default in the YDB driver. In this mode, all requests from goose are sent to the YDB `scripting` service, which allows processing of both [DDL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_definition_language) and [DML](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_manipulation_language) SQL statements.
```

> - `go_fake_tx=scripting` - support for transaction emulation in query execution mode through the YDB `scripting` service. The fact is that in YDB, executing `DDL` `SQL` statements in a transaction is impossible (or incurs significant overhead). In particular, the `scripting` service does not allow interactive transactions (with explicit `Begin`+`Commit`/`Rollback`). Accordingly, the transaction emulation mode does not actually do anything (`nop`) on the `Begin`+`Commit`/`Rollback` calls from `goose`. This trick can, in rare cases, cause an individual migration step to end up in an intermediate state. The YDB team is working on a new `query` service that should help remove this risk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `go_fake_tx=scripting` - support for transaction emulation in query execution mode through the YDB `scripting` service. The fact is that in YDB, executing `DDL` `SQL` statements in a transaction is impossible (or incurs significant overhead). In particular, the `scripting` service does not allow interactive transactions (with explicit `Begin`+`Commit`/`Rollback`). Accordingly, the transaction emulation mode does not actually do anything (`noop`) on the `Begin`+`Commit`/`Rollback` calls from `goose`. This trick can, in rare cases, cause an individual migration step to end up in an intermediate state. The YDB team is working on a new `query` service that should  eliminate this risk.
```

> - `go_query_bind=declare,numeric` - support for bindings of auto-inference of YQL types from query parameters (`declare`) and support for bindings of numbered parameters (`numeric`). The fact is that `YQL` is a strongly typed language that requires you to explicitly specify the types of query parameters in the body of the `SQL` query itself using the special `DECLARE` statement. Also, `YQL` only supports named query parameters (for example, `$my_arg`), while the `goose` core generates `SQL` queries with numbered parameters (`$1`, `$2`, etc.) . The `declare` and `numeric` bindings modify the original queries from `goose` at the YDB driver level, which ultimately allowed `goose` to be built into.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `go_query_bind=declare,numeric` - support for bindings of auto-inference of YQL types from query parameters (`declare`) and support for bindings of numbered parameters (`numeric`). YQL is a strongly typed language that requires you to explicitly specify the types of query parameters in the body of the `SQL` query itself using the special `DECLARE` statement. Also, YQL only supports named query parameters (for example, `$my_arg`), while the goose core generates SQL queries with numbered parameters (`$1`, `$2`, etc.) . The `declare` and `numeric` bindings modify the original queries from `goose` at the YDB driver level.
```

> If connecting to a local YDB docker container, the connection string should look like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If connecting to a local YDB docker container, the connection string could look like:
```

```
grpc://localhost:2136/local?go_query_mode=scripting&go_fake_tx=scripting&go_query_bind=declare,numeric
```

Further examples of calling `goose` commands will contain exactly this connection string.

## Directory with migration files

> Let's create a migrations directory and then all `goose` commands should be executed in this directory:

Reviewer: afaik these are usually maintained in the same code repository as the application's main codebase or at least a separate one, maybe let's add a note here about this?

Author: I think it is too much for article only about migrations with goose

```
$ mkdir migrations && cd migrations
```

## Adding a migration file

The migration file can be generated using the `goose create` command:

```
$ goose ydb "grpc://localhost:2136/local?go_query_mode=scripting&go_fake_tx=scripting&go_query_bind=declare,numeric" create 00001_create_first_table sql
2023/12/15 05:22:48 Created new file: 20231215052248_00001_create_table_users.sql
```

> This means that the tool has created a new migration file `<timestamp>_00001_create_table_users.sql` where we can record the steps to change the schema for the YDB database, which is accessible through the corresponding connection string.

Reviewer: It's not clear whether it is required to use `0000N` in filenames or what's the role of this prefix. It could've been used to ensure the order of files, but it seems like they use a timestamp prefix for this.

Author: You right. It is human-readable prefix of migrations only.

> So, after executing the goose create command, a migration file `<timestamp>_00001_create_table_users.sql` will be created with the following content:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After executing the `goose create` command, a migration file `<timestamp>_00001_create_table_users.sql` will be created with the following content :
```

```
-- +goose Up
-- +goose StatementBegin
SELECT 'up SQL query';
-- +goose StatementEnd

-- +goose Down
-- +goose StatementBegin
SELECT 'down SQL query';
-- +goose StatementEnd
```

This migration file structure helps keep the instructions that lead to the next version of the database in context. It is also easy, without unnecessary distractions, to write instructions that roll back a database change.

> The migration file consists of two sections. The first is `+goose Up`, an area where we can record the migration steps. The second is `+goose Down`, an area in which we can write a step for invert making changes for the `+goose Up` steps. `Goose` carefully inserted placeholder queries:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The migration file consists of two sections:

1. `+goose Up` is an area where we can record the migration steps.
2. `+goose Down` is an area where we can write queries to revert changes of the `+goose Up` steps. 

Goose carefully inserted placeholder queries:
```

```
SELECT 'up SQL query';
```

And

```
SELECT 'down SQL query';
```

> so that we can instead enter essentially the migration requests themselves.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
so that we can replace them with the real migration SQL queries.
```

Author: fixed

> Let's edit the migration file `<timestamp>_00001_create_table_users.sql` so that when applying the migration we create a table of the structure we need, and when rolling back the migration we delete the created table:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's edit the migration file `<timestamp>_00001_create_table_users.sql` so that when applying the migration we create a table with necessary schema, and when rolling back the migration we delete the created table:
```

```
-- +goose Up
-- +goose StatementBegin
CREATE TABLE users (
     id Uint64,
     username Text,
     created_at TzDatetime,
     PRIMARY KEY (id)
);
-- +goose StatementEnd

-- +goose Down
-- +goose StatementBegin
DROP TABLE users;
-- +goose StatementEnd
```

> All subsequent migration files should be created in the same way.

Reviewer: let's finish the tutorial with actually executing `goose up`, checking that the table exists and the schema matches, maybe writing a few rows into it, then `goose down` and finally check that the table is gone

Author: Ok, i added two migration steps and downgrade. Can you re-check it?

## Managing migrations

The `goose` utility allows you to manage migrations via the command line:
- `goose up` - apply all known migrations. For example, `goose ydb "grpc://localhost:2136/local?go_query_mode=scripting&go_fake_tx=scripting&go_query_bind=declare,numeric" up`.

> - `goose reset` - rollback all migrations. For example, `goose ydb "grpc://localhost:2136/local?go_query_mode=scripting&go_fake_tx=scripting&go_query_bind=declare,numeric" reset`.

Reviewer: This sounds like an extremely dangerous command that could accidentally wipe the whole database (for example if you confuse it with `goose down`). Can we recommend some protection against that? Or at least explicitly warn readers.

Author: This is official command of goose. It is dangerous for all RDBMs, not only YDB
I can drop this command from article, but command `reset` - is a part of goose tool, and customer may faound it in `goose help`

Author: Ok, I will add warning about this command

Author: I added warning

- `goose up-by-one` - apply exactly one “next” migration. For example, `goose ydb "grpc://localhost:2136/local?go_query_mode=scripting&go_fake_tx=scripting&go_query_bind=declare,numeric" up-by-one`.
- `goose redo` - re-apply the latest migration. For example, `goose ydb "grpc://localhost:2136/local?go_query_mode=scripting&go_fake_tx=scripting&go_query_bind=declare,numeric" redo`.
- `goose down` - rollback the last migration. For example, `goose ydb "grpc://localhost:2136/local?go_query_mode=scripting&go_fake_tx=scripting&go_query_bind=declare,numeric" down`.

> - `goose status` - view the status of applying migrations. For example, `goose ydb "grpc://localhost:2136/local?go_query_mode=scripting&go_fake_tx=scripting&go_query_bind=declare,numeric" status`.

Reviewer: probably needs an example on how the output looks like and how to interpret it

> # Versioning data schema and migration in YDB using "goose"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Data schema versioning and migration in YDB using "goose"
```

```
SELECT 'up SQL query';
```

And

```
SELECT 'down SQL query';
```

We can replace this statements to statements for change the schema for the YDB database, which is accessible through the corresponding connection string.

Let's edit the migration file `<timestamp>_00001_create_table_users.sql` so that when applying the migration we create a table with necessary schema, and when rolling back the migration we delete the created table:

```
-- +goose Up
-- +goose StatementBegin
CREATE TABLE users (
     id Uint64,
     username Text,
     created_at Timestamp,
     PRIMARY KEY (id)
);
-- +goose StatementEnd

-- +goose Down
-- +goose StatementBegin
DROP TABLE users;
-- +goose StatementEnd
```

We can check status of migrations:

```
$ goose ydb "grpc://localhost:2136/local?go_query_mode=scripting&go_fake_tx=scripting&go_query_bind=declare,numeric" status
2024/01/12 11:53:50     Applied At                  Migration
2024/01/12 11:53:50     =======================================
2024/01/12 11:53:50     Pending                  -- 20240112115229_00001_create_first_table.sql
```

> Status `Pending` of migration means that migration not applied and you can apply it through commands `goose up` or `goose up-by-one`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Status `Pending` of migration means that migration has not been applied yet. You can apply such migrations with commands `goose up` or `goose up-by-one`.
```

> Let's apply migration using `goose up`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's apply the migration using `goose up`:
```

```
$ goose ydb "grpc://localhost:2136/local?go_query_mode=scripting&go_fake_tx=scripting&go_query_bind=declare,numeric" up
2024/01/12 11:55:18 OK   20240112115229_00001_create_first_table.sql (93.58ms)
2024/01/12 11:55:18 goose: successfully migrated database to version: 20240112115229
```

> Let's check the status of migration through `goose status`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's check the migration status with `goose status`:
```

```
$ goose ydb "grpc://localhost:2136/local?go_query_mode=scripting&go_fake_tx=scripting&go_query_bind=declare,numeric" status
2024/01/12 11:56:00     Applied At                  Migration
2024/01/12 11:56:00     =======================================
2024/01/12 11:56:00     Fri Jan 12 11:55:18 2024 -- 20240112115229_00001_create_first_table.sql
```

> Status `Pending` changed to timestamp `Fri Jan 12 11:55:18 2024` - this means that migration applied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Status `Pending` changed to timestamp `Fri Jan 12 11:55:18 2024`: this means that migration has been applied at this moment of time.
```

> Also we can see a changes through another options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are alternative options to see the applied changes:
```

{% list tabs %}

- Using YDB UI on http://localhost:8765

>   ![YDB UI after apply first migration](../_assets/goose-ydb-ui-after-first-migration.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ![YDB UI after the first migration](../_assets/goose-ydb-ui-after-first-migration.png)
```

- Using YDB CLI

  ```
  $ ydb -e grpc://localhost:2136 -d /local scheme describe users
  <table> users

  Columns:
  ┌────────────┬────────────┬────────┬─────┐
  │ Name       │ Type       │ Family │ Key │
  ├────────────┼────────────┼────────┼─────┤
  │ id         │ Uint64?    │        │ K0  │
  │ username   │ Utf8?      │        │     │
  │ created_at │ Timestamp? │        │     │
  └────────────┴────────────┴────────┴─────┘

  Storage settings:
  Store large values in "external blobs": false

  Column families:
  ┌─────────┬──────┬─────────────┬────────────────┐
  │ Name    │ Data │ Compression │ Keep in memory │
  ├─────────┼──────┼─────────────┼────────────────┤
  │ default │      │ None        │                │
  └─────────┴──────┴─────────────┴────────────────┘

  Auto partitioning settings:
  Partitioning by size: true
  Partitioning by load: false
  Preferred partition size (Mb): 2048
  Min partitions count: 1
  ```

{% endlist %}

> Let's make the second migration with adding column `password_hash` to table `users`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's make the second migration that adds a column `password_hash` to the `users` table:
```

```
$ goose ydb "grpc://localhost:2136/local?go_query_mode=scripting&go_fake_tx=scripting&go_query_bind=declare,numeric" create 00002_add_column_password_hash_into_table_users sql
2024/01/12 12:00:57 Created new file: 20240112120057_00002_add_column_password_hash_into_table_users.sql
```

Let's edit the migration file `<timestamp>_00002_add_column_password_hash_into_table_users.sql`:

```
-- +goose Up
-- +goose StatementBegin
ALTER TABLE users ADD COLUMN password_hash Text;
-- +goose StatementEnd

-- +goose Down
-- +goose StatementBegin
ALTER TABLE users DROP COLUMN password_hash;
-- +goose StatementEnd
```

> We can check status of migrations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can check the migration statuses again:
```

```
$ goose ydb "grpc://localhost:2136/local?go_query_mode=scripting&go_fake_tx=scripting&go_query_bind=declare,numeric" status
2024/01/12 12:02:40     Applied At                  Migration
2024/01/12 12:02:40     =======================================
2024/01/12 12:02:40     Fri Jan 12 11:55:18 2024 -- 20240112115229_00001_create_first_table.sql
2024/01/12 12:02:40     Pending                  -- 20240112120057_00002_add_column_password_hash_into_table_users.sql
```

> We see first migration in applied status and second in pending status.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we see the first migration in applied status and the second in pending status.
```

> Let's apply migration using `goose up-by-one`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's apply the second migration using `goose up-by-one`:
```

```
$ goose ydb "grpc://localhost:2136/local?go_query_mode=scripting&go_fake_tx=scripting&go_query_bind=declare,numeric" up-by-one
2024/01/12 12:04:56 OK   20240112120057_00002_add_column_password_hash_into_table_users.sql (59.93ms)
```

> Let's check the status of migration through `goose status`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's check the migration status through `goose status`:
```

```
$ goose ydb "grpc://localhost:2136/local?go_query_mode=scripting&go_fake_tx=scripting&go_query_bind=declare,numeric" status
2024/01/12 12:05:17     Applied At                  Migration
2024/01/12 12:05:17     =======================================
2024/01/12 12:05:17     Fri Jan 12 11:55:18 2024 -- 20240112115229_00001_create_first_table.sql
2024/01/12 12:05:17     Fri Jan 12 12:04:56 2024 -- 20240112120057_00002_add_column_password_hash_into_table_users.sql
```

> Both migration applied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both migration are fully applied.
```

> Also we can see a changes through another options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's use the same methods to see the new changes:
```

- Using YDB CLI

  ```
  $ ydb -e grpc://localhost:2136 -d /local scheme describe users
  <table> users

  Columns:
  ┌───────────────┬────────────┬────────┬─────┐
  │ Name          │ Type       │ Family │ Key │
  ├───────────────┼────────────┼────────┼─────┤
  │ id            │ Uint64?    │        │ K0  │
  │ username      │ Utf8?      │        │     │
  │ created_at    │ Timestamp? │        │     │
  │ password_hash │ Utf8?      │        │     │
  └───────────────┴────────────┴────────┴─────┘

  Storage settings:
  Store large values in "external blobs": false

  Column families:
  ┌─────────┬──────┬─────────────┬────────────────┐
  │ Name    │ Data │ Compression │ Keep in memory │
  ├─────────┼──────┼─────────────┼────────────────┤
  │ default │      │ None        │                │
  └─────────┴──────┴─────────────┴────────────────┘

  Auto partitioning settings:
  Partitioning by size: true
  Partitioning by load: false
  Preferred partition size (Mb): 2048
  Min partitions count: 1
  ```

{% endlist %}

All subsequent migration files should be created in the same way.

### Downgrading migrations

> Let's downgrade latest migration using `goose down`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's downgrade (revert) the latest migration using `goose down`:
```

```
$ goose ydb "grpc://localhost:2136/local?go_query_mode=scripting&go_fake_tx=scripting&go_query_bind=declare,numeric" down
2024/01/12 13:07:18 OK   20240112120057_00002_add_column_password_hash_into_table_users.sql (43ms)
```

> Let's check the status of migration through `goose status`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's check the migration statuses through `goose status`:
```

```
$ goose ydb "grpc://localhost:2136/local?go_query_mode=scripting&go_fake_tx=scripting&go_query_bind=declare,numeric" status
2024/01/12 13:07:36     Applied At                  Migration
2024/01/12 13:07:36     =======================================
2024/01/12 13:07:36     Fri Jan 12 11:55:18 2024 -- 20240112115229_00001_create_first_table.sql
2024/01/12 13:07:36     Pending                  -- 20240112120057_00002_add_column_password_hash_into_table_users.sql
```

> Status `Fri Jan 12 12:04:56 2024` changed to `Pending` - this means that latest migration downd.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Status `Fri Jan 12 12:04:56 2024` changed to `Pending` - this means that the latest migration is no longer applied.
```

> Also we can see a changes through another options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's check the changes again:
```

The `goose` utility allows you to manage migrations via the command line:
- `goose status` - view the status of applying migrations. For example, `goose ydb "grpc://localhost:2136/local?go_query_mode=scripting&go_fake_tx=scripting&go_query_bind=declare,numeric" status`.
- `goose up` - apply all known migrations. For example, `goose ydb "grpc://localhost:2136/local?go_query_mode=scripting&go_fake_tx=scripting&go_query_bind=declare,numeric" up`.
- `goose up-by-one` - apply exactly one “next” migration. For example, `goose ydb "grpc://localhost:2136/local?go_query_mode=scripting&go_fake_tx=scripting&go_query_bind=declare,numeric" up-by-one`.
- `goose redo` - re-apply the latest migration. For example, `goose ydb "grpc://localhost:2136/local?go_query_mode=scripting&go_fake_tx=scripting&go_query_bind=declare,numeric" redo`.
- `goose down` - rollback the last migration. For example, `goose ydb "grpc://localhost:2136/local?go_query_mode=scripting&go_fake_tx=scripting&go_query_bind=declare,numeric" down`.
- `goose reset` - rollback all migrations. For example, `goose ydb "grpc://localhost:2136/local?go_query_mode=scripting&go_fake_tx=scripting&go_query_bind=declare,numeric" reset`. 

>   > Be careful: the `goose reset` command will revert all your migrations using your statements in blocks `+goose Down`. This also means that all your data in the database will be erased.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

{% note warning %}

Be careful: the `goose reset` command will revert all your migrations using your statements in blocks `+goose Down`. In many cases it might lead to all data in the database being erased. Make sure you regularly do backups and check that they can be restored to minimize impact of this risk.

{% endnote %}
```

If connecting to a local YDB docker container, the connection string could look like:

```
grpc://localhost:2136/local?go_query_mode=scripting&go_fake_tx=scripting&go_query_bind=declare,numeric
```

Further examples of calling `goose` commands will contain exactly this connection string.

## Directory with migration files

Let's create a migrations directory and then all `goose` commands should be executed in this directory:

```
$ mkdir migrations && cd migrations
```

## Managing migrations using goose

### Creating migration files and applying to database

The migration file can be generated using the `goose create` command:

```

> $ goose ydb "grpc://localhost:2136/local?go_query_mode=scripting&go_fake_tx=scripting&go_query_bind=declare,numeric" create 00001_create_first_table sql

Author: I will re-write articles with `export YDB_CONNECTION_STRING=...` step and using env in goose commands

- `go_query_bind=declare,numeric` - support for bindings of auto-inference of YQL types from query parameters (`declare`) and support for bindings of numbered parameters (`numeric`). YQL is a strongly typed language that requires you to explicitly specify the types of query parameters in the body of the `SQL` query itself using the special `DECLARE` statement. Also, YQL only supports named query parameters (for example, `$my_arg`), while the goose core generates SQL queries with numbered parameters (`$1`, `$2`, etc.) . The `declare` and `numeric` bindings modify the original queries from `goose` at the YDB driver level.

If connecting to a local YDB docker container, the connection string could look like:

```
grpc://localhost:2136/local?go_query_mode=scripting&go_fake_tx=scripting&go_query_bind=declare,numeric
```

> Let's store this connection string to environment variable for following usage:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's store this connection string to an environment variable to re-use it later:
```
